hey what's going on everyone my name is
Hunter and welcome to a brand new spell
kit video in today's video we're going
to be learning about form actions in
spell kit and to do so we'll be putting
the pieces together for this contact
manager application that I've went ahead
and done the initial style and structure
for already as that's not the main focus
of the video but essentially our goal is
going to be to be able to add and delete
contacts and we'll be starting out with
some regular form actions and then
towards the end of the video we'll
Implement Progressive enhancement which
will allow us to you know take advantage
of JavaScript to improve the user
experience if JavaScript is available
however our forms will still be
functional even with JavaScript is not
available so let's take a look at what
we have so far as far as code inside of
our contacts folder we have a
page.server.js which just has a default
contact here that we were setting up
Saul Goodman and you can think of this
contacts as your database right in most
cases if you want to render out data in
a table like this one you have a load
function which fetches data from your
database and then passes it to the page
that's felt and if you're not familiar
with how load functions work I'd highly
suggest you take a look at my loading
data in Smokey video which I will have a
card for in the top right as well as a
link to in the video description so this
array of contacts gets passed into our
page.spel through this load function and
then we accept those contacts in the
form of a data prop here and as you can
see inside of our page that's felt we
also have our form that's being rendered
on the page right now you can see that
we have the name email company and job
and then at the bottom we have the
contacts table which we are passing
data.contacts which is that data prop
with the contacts into and if we take a
look at this context table it's a
literal copy and paste of Daisy ui's
tape one of their tables I just replaced
some of the blanks with the contact
information so you can see here that
it's accepting the prop contacts and
then we're actually running in each
block for each contact and then
rendering out one of these rows for each
contact right so it's very simple if you
take a look at the code I'll have the
source code in the description it's very
simple nothing overly complex here I'm
also generating a random Avatar with
this pravatar link here as well as you
can see yeah so let's go ahead and get
into implementing some form actions so
we Define our form actions inside of the
page.server.js so whatever page we want
to add these actions to and we're going
to start out with the default action
right so what we're going to say is
we're going to say export const actions
it's an object and then we're going to
say default as one of the properties and
it's going to be an async function
and then what we're going to take out of
this is going to be the request and let
me show you really quick where I'm
getting this from so if we look at this
Focus documentation I think it's very
important that you understand how to
find the information you're looking for
and how to experiment and and kind of
figure out you know even though the
documentation isn't super
straightforward you can still kind of
figure out what you're looking for by
digging a little bit deeper so if we
look at the anatomy of an action here we
can see that each action receives a
request event object which is what would
be inside of these parentheses here and
then we're taking out the request from
that object right we're destructuring
the request out of that object so if I
click on this request event here we can
see what this looks like we can see the
interface for it we can see that it has
you know cookies it has locals params
requests really I think the ones you're
going to really care the most about are
going to be the locals params requests
and cookies especially if you're doing
any type of authentication system you
want to definitely have access to those
cookies there but for now we're just
going to worry about the request which
contains the form data so let me just
show you really quick so we can actually
take form data out of the request
consorm data equals await request dot
form data
analysis console log form data
and I'll be doing quite a lot of console
logs during this video I think it's very
helpful with visualizing how data is
being passed around what you're
receiving where I think it really helps
kind of put the pieces together and make
sense of what you're actually doing
versus just typing in a bunch of you
know a bunch of lines of code that you
know work but you don't really know why
or how they work so let's go back to our
contacts here and we can see we need to
submit this form and the default action
we actually don't have to specify
anything except for a method on our form
so if we go to our form here and we type
method
equals posts by default if there's no
action specified and there's a default
action defined inside of these
page.server file it's going to hit this
action here so we can save and now we
can do is we can just type some data in
and we can watch the console on our
server side so say Waltz
when I hit enter you can see that we get
a form.object back instead of our
console that's where console logging
here and you can see that has a few
different name properties it's a bunch
of different objects each with their own
name property and their own value
property and you may be asking yourself
okay where is it getting this these
names from well if we look inside of our
form we can see that each input has a
name property and if you notice this
matches up perfectly with what is
returned inside of form data now there's
a few different ways we can extract this
data I would probably recommend looking
up you know helper function and defining
a helper function somewhere in your
utilities to where you can easily just
pass the entire form data object to it
and then it'll just return a nice
beautiful object full of your values but
for purposes of this video we're just
going to keep it simple here we'll just
say const name equals formdata dot get
and then we're going to pass in the name
value right so the value of this name
tag here so that's going to be our name
that we passed in and then we'll say
email
form data.get email
and I'll just copy this a few more times
here we'll say company and then we'll
say job and then just to show you that
we are in fact getting that name back
for example let's just run another one
you can see that we do in fact get Walt
back here another thing that we're going
to need is an ID and we can pretty
easily by saying const ID equals crypto
this is a built-in Library dot random
uid and that's going to be useful later
we go to actually delete an item and
you'll see that will come up here in a
few minutes so now that we have all this
data this is where you can do a few
different things you can start to you
know construct a database object and
then save it to your database you can do
some validation which we're going to
touch on here shortly so in this step
we're going to build a contact out of
these out of this data here and then
we're going to push it to this array and
then it's going to display on our page
so let's go ahead and do that so we can
just Define cons contact
and we'll say ID name email company
and job and then we can say contacts dot
push contact so we're basically adding
this contact to this array we can save
now let's go ahead and test this out by
creating new contact
and you can see that we do in fact get
this added here right so you can see
that the data is now being pushed to the
contacts however right now our
application has no idea if that was
successful or if it was a failure or if
we do anything else so let's return
something here let's return
success is true and just hear aware
whenever we're using this page.server
here and we actually save this file and
it reloads the server it's going to
delete the context that we added you
know add for the fact and it's just
going to keep this default contact here
okay so that's why you'll see this
delete but if you're using an actual
database which you probably should be
that obviously won't happen to you so
what are we returning here and you may
be asking yourself okay where does this
go where does this return value being
passed to we're obviously returning it
somewhere right let's go into our page
that's felt and let's export
let form
now it's console log form now let's
rerun this
and we can see that in our console we
get success is true additionally inside
of our client side console we get
success is true which is pretty
interesting right that means that we can
you know pass some information about our
form back to our client side which could
be useful for things like validation and
being able to return data back to the
form itself so let's go ahead and set up
some very very basic validation I do
plan on doing a full video on validation
with spell kit but this video it would
just be too long if I went into it so
we'll just go into you know service
level so you can get an idea and I think
you know once you see how this works
you'll be able to kind of brainstorm and
take those ideas and run with them and
build up your own you know nice looking
UI with with great validation so let's
just say that we want to make sure that
the name is at least two characters
right so let's say if name dot length is
less than two we're going to return
invalid with a 400 and then we're going
to pass an object and you can see here
that invalid comes from JS kit and
you'll see what this is going to look
like here shortly so we'll say error is
true and message is name must be at
least two characters
Okay cool so now let's go ahead and
Trigger this right let's go ahead and
Trigger this by passing in a name that
is not to not at least two characters
we'll go into our we'll pop up in our
console over here and we'll just say w
and I'm just going to kind of keep these
quick requests here short so we're not
wasting too much time and we're not
seeing anything in our console let's
make sure oh we're not console logging
the form anymore so am I bad let's
console log that okay so now you can see
the message that came through it says
error is true message name must be at
least two characters okay that's cool
but our entire form is reset so I don't
know if you think that's annoying but I
think it's really annoying if I go and
fill out an entire form and I didn't
pass validation on one field so it
resets the whole form and I have to
start from scratch we definitely don't
want that so how can we prevent that
from happening well instead of just
returning an error in a message we can
also return the actual form data values
here so we can just say name
email company
job and we'll omit ID for the time being
because the ID really shouldn't get
generated until it passes validation
because that would be you know as it
hits your database for example once it
passed the validation then it would get
its ID so we'll move that down here so
now let's try it out so let's go and
create another one
add okay so you can see here that we are
getting these values and let me actually
just submit something that isn't just a
w so say
just so you can better see what we're
working with here so we now have my job
as job we have the company is my company
and we have an email here so we have
access to this information now in the
front end in the client as well as in
our page.spel so how do we go about
getting that information back into our
form well it's pretty simple so remember
we have access to this form right and
this form is this object here which has
a company property an email property a
job property and a name property so
let's go ahead and wire this up what we
can do is inside of our inputs we can
say value equals form question mark dot
name for this one and then we'll run
double question marks here and it's
empty string so we're doing optional
chaining here which essentially is just
like using the dot so it's the same
thing as using form.name except if this
is not doesn't exist it won't give us
narrow it'll just be undefined which is
a falsy value so that means this would
be false right this evaluation this
expression will be false which means it
would result in an empty string so
basically to simplify this if this
exists put this as the value if it
doesn't or an empty string so we'll copy
this and we'll use the same thing on all
the inputs so go to this next input here
we'll change this to form.email we'll go
to the company one the same thing and
then we'll go into the job
now when I hit save you'll see that this
data was automatically was already
populated so we can just kind of reset
this all together and just test it out
again so let's just say m Mike at
example.com
Mike
co-ceo okay so all the data was passed
back and you can see that the form
retained its information right it just
received a message saying that it was
name must be at least two characters and
then if we pass two characters in the
form resets because we get a success is
true and this data was not returned
form.email form.name evaluated to false
because it doesn't exist so it put an
empty string there right and let's just
say for example that you didn't return
all the fields so I'm I'm sure that all
of you are familiar if you go to
register for a site you put in your
password you confirm your password and
then you have a validation issue when it
comes back it's going to clear your
password out so you have to type it in
again so to do something like that all
we have to do is just omit that value
whatever we don't want to return here so
let's just say we didn't want to return
the company
type in our name
now our company is is not populated here
right we didn't return it so great all
this seems to be working as expected we
can just run one more test run here so
we can just say Jesse
we have Jesse and now we want to
actually delete items right this way
we're into the problem with using a
default action since both of these forms
or both of these actions essentially are
being conducted on the same page we
actually can't use default we need to
use named actions if we look here at the
12 kit documentation we can see that
instead of one default action a page can
have as many named actions as it needs
you can see that we dropped the default
and we replace it with a name and then
to invoke that named action we need to
add a query parameter with a name prefix
by a slash character to our form so
let's go ahead and do that now we'll go
into our page.server first and we'll
change this action to create
because this is going to be creating a
contact right and you'll see if we try
to click anything we're going to get an
error because it says no action with
name default found so inside that form
we need to actually specify the action
we'll say action equals so we're going
to do a query parameter so question mark
and then slash the name of the action
right you can see here that now if we
try to run the same thing
it's working again so now let's go ahead
and Implement our delete right we'll
click on this button and have it delete
these contacts so let's first look at
what this delete button looks like so if
we go into our contacts table we'll see
that currently we just have a button
here right so how are we supposed to
make this button trigger an action
within our page.server.js well it's
simple we're going to turn it into a
form
so create a form tag here and then
inside of the form we're also going to
put an input
it's going to be a type hidden we're
also going to say hidden here and then
we're going to say value is going to be
contact dot ID because remember we have
access to this contact here and we need
some way to identify which contact we're
trying to delete so each one of these
buttons is going to then you know hit
our delete action once we create it and
it's going to have form data dot or it's
going to have the ID as a part of form
data so we can set the name is equal to
ID and then the action is going to be
question mark
slash delete we'll create that in just a
second and we'll say method
post
and then we can come into our
page.server.js and we can Define that
next action so after we get you know
after create we can put a comma because
this is an object remember and we can
say delete and this is going to be
asynchronous as well
we're going to take in the request again
because we're getting that form data
right
and we're going to say const form data
equals await request dot form data
and then we'll say const ID equals form
data dot get ID
and let's just make sure that we're
getting this we click delete right so I
just saved and we can see that if we
click delete here let's check our
console click delete we're now going to
have the ID which if you notice this
matches 981 matches Saul Goodman's uid
so now we have access to that and you
know if you're obviously working with a
database for example this is where you'd
make that call to go and delete this ID
now something to keep in mind though is
that although we hit that input It's Not
Invisible to the user so I can just use
this here and go to the delete button
and let's see here right above it I can
see there's an input here with a type of
hidden and I can also see the value so
again this shouldn't be any type of
secret value it could also be edited by
the user before submitting the form so
you obviously want to make sure that
you're checking for proper
authentication or authorization things
of that nature but that's how we're
passing that ID over to our action right
so now how do we actually remove this
we're just going to filter the array
again like I said obviously if you're
running a database you would want to go
and delete that item but let's just
filter our array so we'll say contacts
equals contacts dot filter
contact
dot ID is not equal to ID so basically
what this filter does if you're
unfamiliar is we're saying go through
that array and then if the each item in
the array is represented as contact so
for example this is the first one if
that ID if this evaluates to true we're
going to keep it if it's false we're
going to filter it out we're going to
remove it right so every contact except
for the moment the ID that matches will
be retained inside of that context array
and the one that matches will be taken
out so we can actually save this here
and test it out so if we hit delete you
can now see that Saul Goodman is gone
and we're also console logging form
still so I'm just going to remove that
for the time being and we can add
another one here
and you can see that we can delete
wallet too so that's really as simple as
it is to delete we can also make sure we
return something here to return
success is true
because then it would allow us to
display some type of like toast or
something we could track that inside of
pages felt the same way that we track
anything else right we could track it
and then show a toe saying that your
contact was successfully deleted okay so
now it's time to talk a little bit about
Progressive enhancement what that is
what we're doing currently versus what
we're going to be doing here in a few
minutes so if we check our format again
here
we can see that the page is reloading on
every single form submission right same
thing for deleting if we delete
you can see that the whole page Reloaded
and if you're coming from something like
react for example you know that you know
typically you're not actually reading
the whole page this is a single page
application and that's generally a
better user experience because it seems
almost like the thing was just ripped
out of their website they didn't
actually have to reload the page they
can just delete the item and it goes
away without any type of reloading even
though it's quick we still want to
improve that user experience so if we
read Focus documentation here and we
scroll down to Progressive enhancement
you can see that that they mentioned
that in the tutorial they built an
action that works without JavaScript
that's great but when JavaScript is
available we can progressively enhance
our form interactions to provide a user
experience just as we had just discussed
and it says the easiest way to use or to
progressively enhance the form is to
either use enhanced action you can see
that we import this and then we just
simply add it to our form and then it
says without an argument use enhance
will emulate the browser native Behavior
just without the full page reloads it's
going to update the form property
page.form and page.status on a
successful invalid response but only if
the action is on the same page you're
submitting from so actions can be
submitted to any other pages so
basically we can put a form on slash
users for example sample and then hit
our contacts action by using actually
slash contacts question mark slash
create we can create a new contact like
that right but if we're doing that we're
not going to get these same enhancements
that we get if we're doing on the same
page it's also going to invalidate all
data invalid all for reference just
makes the load function rerun
essentially so you're gonna get that
refresh data back and then also render
the nearest air boundary if an error
occurs so we can customize the behavior
by providing a function that runs before
the form is submitted and returns a
callback with the action result so
that's what we're going to be taking a
look at next is actually enhancing our
form to use JavaScript when it's
available and so let's go ahead and do
that and you'll see why I actually made
this the way that I did with the form
and the table on the same page because
it is different it requires less work if
you have the form on a separate page
than the actual table or the data that
you're trying to display for example so
let's take a look at this and we'll
start by just adding that default use
enhance just to kind of see what's going
to happen we add that right so instead
of our page that's felt we're going to
import the enhance from App slash forms
and then inside of our form here we're
going to say
use enhance
and then also inside of our contacts
table when you go to that button a form
here and do the same thing
make sure we import that up top great so
let's just see what happens now so let's
refresh let's save our page.server so we
can get a value back so now we delete
something it works just as expected you
can see that there's no
loading of the page so we click delete
watch
browser doesn't reload but the item is
deleted right and again I'm bringing the
item back by just saving just just
hitting save on this page over here so
it reloads that data let's just say we
want to create a new contact let's just
say we want to create Hunter
hit add okay it works but the form is
still populated with data and I can just
Spam enter and it will just create a ton
of me's right that actually looks pretty
close to what I look like in real life
so that's pretty accurate so basically
what we want to do is we actually want
to clear this form out unless the data
is invalid and by using the default use
enhance we can't do that so we're going
to have to make some adjustments so
instead of our page.spel we actually
need to extend this use enhanced
function I'm going to move this to the
end of this tag here so that it's a
little bit cleaner and we're going to
pass this a function that we're going to
find inside of these enhance so we're
going to take in some parameters and
we're going to take in form and then
we're going to return async
with the structure results whoops
results and updates
so this is how it's how it looks now
let's just save it so it formats it
makes it look nicer so if we look back
at the documentation here we can see
that using hands can take in form data
action or cancel we see that form is the
form element data is its form data
object and then action is the URL to
which the form is posted cancel will
prevent the submission and then inside
of the return the Callback we can get
result which is an action result object
we'll take a look at that in a second
and then update is a function which
triggers the logic that will be
triggered if this callback wasn't set so
all that default logic up here we were
talking about where it says without an
argument it will emulate the browser
name Behavior so we need to take care of
that so let's just take a look at some
of these things that are being passed
into using hands so let's look at form
let's look at data and let's get action
we're not going to cancel because again
that's just going to cancel the
submission and a good way to think about
this is this runs before form submission
to server
and this runs after form submission to
server
okay
so let's just console log some of these
so we're going to constant log form
is going to be form we'll say this is
going to be data
and then this will be action right
action yep
and then we can also console log the
result we're not going to console log
the update because that's a that's a
function and we don't want to call that
so we'll say results
and let's just see what happens so let's
open up our console on our browser okay
and you can already see that we have
some data here let's just clear that out
and let us just submit something in this
form so let's submit
oh
so let's hit add we can see here we get
a bunch of data we get the form which is
literally this form object here I mean
you can even see when I'm hovering over
it it's it's selecting the items inside
of that form so we can see our form
object here we have access to we also
have access to the form data and we also
have access to the action which is
basically where what we're trying to hit
you can see that we are looking for
create you can get a bunch of
information regarding the destination so
you could do things like if it's heading
for this destination do this if it's
destined for this location do that so
there's a lot of different things you
can do here it's really flexible and
they give you a lot of information that
you can use so inside the result we can
see that remember this is after the form
submits to the server you see that we
get a type of success we also get a data
where it says success is true now the
type of success should not be confused
with success is true this is our own
return statement here this is coming
from the form so if the form
successfully submits it will return
success if not it will return invalid or
an error right so let's just see what we
can do with this information that we
have these different inputs we can take
in right so the first thing that we want
to do is we want to reset the form once
it comes is back on the Callback right
so once it gets submitted to the server
and it's successful we want it to reset
the form so how do we do that well if we
look at the forms.or form.resets and
it's going to search Bing because I'm on
my guess but we can see here that
form.reset is actually a HTML Dom API
and we can reset the form to all of its
default values right so the default
values for our form are defined inside
of page.spel if we look here this is the
default value and since we're not going
to be returning this information on a
successful response it will result in
this so we can do that instead of our
callback by simply running form.reset
right here instead there's console log
we'll just run form.reset and again we
have access to that form because we
received it here we're actually not
going to use data or action so we'll
just take those out so I'm going to say
form.reset but we only want it to reset
if it was successful so we can say if
result.type equals equals success then
we want to do a form reset right so if
you recall the result.type again is not
to be confused with the success true
right the result type comes from the 4
form so if if we return here for example
an invalid it's going to be invalid if
we returned an error here it would be an
error if we don't return anything if we
just return it's going to be successful
so what we want to do really quick is
actually set up a way to kind of display
the alerts I know we're kind of bouncing
away from what we're just doing but I
think this is important to get to the
next step so we can see some of the
differences here and why we have to do
certain things the way we have to do
them so let's go ahead and set up and
set up our alert component again this is
just copied from Daisy UI it just takes
in a message and just displays a little
red alert so what we want to do is we
have an error like for example this one
we want to actually show that error
message and that alert while the error
exists so if we go into page.svelt and
we go to the bottom here the bottom of
our form we're going to just import the
alert component
and then we're going to do is we're
going to say if form
dot I think we named it message right
message or form dot error let's do a
form.error first if there's an error
then we're going to pass message equals
form Dot message so now let's go ahead
and create an error on our form
you can see that it's not updating
because we are using this enhancements
right so if we disable JavaScript right
now so let's go into our Chrome tools
here and let's just disable
now when we click add we're going to see
that right so we should be seeing that
message regardless so right now we just
have our page or our use enhance setup
for Success right we're not doing
anything with the invalids so we want
this to show up even we have JavaScript
enabled let's go ahead and get that
working so we're going to do is we're
going to clear this query from the URL
and we're going to say if result.type
equals equals invalid
we're going to run a weight apply action
which is imported from App slash forms
and we're going to pass in the result so
let's save this really quick let's see
if this works so if we say h
now we can see that we get that error
message here right even with JavaScript
enabled however our form when we submit
it still so if I say hunter
we can see that we did add it right the
form cleared the form reset as expected
but when we refreshed it for one this
didn't go away and for two we have to
refresh the page in order to actually
see this populate here so let's take a
look at how we can do that if we look at
the form actions documentation we can
see that we have an update which is a
function that triggers the logic that
will be triggered if this callback
wasn't set so which is all of this logic
here where it invalidates all data
that's the big piece that we're looking
for here is it invalidates all data
which makes that load function run again
because right now the load function is
only running one time it's not running
whenever we submit this form and we want
that to happen so to do so we can just
simply say update
now we add somebody let's just add Paul
now you can see that it does in fact
populate right and if we just again
cause an error of some sort
you can see that the name must be at
least two characters okay let's just
make it Pablo add the error message goes
away and we're now getting this here and
our delete buttons still work as
expected right using that use enhance
defaults which is fine because we're not
doing anything super super crazy with
that we're just deleting it once it
disappear so that is how we can use form
actions with and without JavaScript and
we can I can show you really quick if I
just disable JavaScript again just to
show you that all this functionality
still works with JavaScript disabled so
let's delete this contact let's add a
new one
okay that works just as expected right
let's cause an error here
oh I got an error
name air goes away so again this is
without JavaScript whatsoever so the
reason that we have to do this using
hands is because we are not being
redirected for example we want the data
to dynamically update on the page that
the form is being submitted on right so
you know in most applications or in a
lot that I've seen recently you know you
have a form on a separate page and maybe
once you for example add a new contact
it will immediately take you to the
contacts page right so after we added
that contact you want to go to that
contacts page you can start adding some
more details about it that's actually
handled through a redirect so instead of
just returning success is true here we
could simply throw a redirect which
comes from JS kit
we just say 303 and we'll just say slash
right we want to redirect to the home
page after we submit so in your example
or in our example here let's just say
our contact list was on another page we
had a modal where we had a page that
took us to add the contact and we had a
contact on a separate page we want to
redirect to the contact list after we
submitted this form if it was successful
of course right so in that case we would
just set this here
so now when I submit that form all of
this logic still took place it just took
me to the home page instead and then
when I go back to contacts you can see
that now I have myself that I just
created here on the contacts page so I
think it's going to cover what I want to
cover with form actions if you guys have
any questions or you would like me to
make anything more specific I am
planning on doing a validation video
which which gives us a much better way
to validate than just using a bunch of
if statements here but other than that
if you guys have any questions or you'd
like to see anything specific related to
form actions please let me know I
greatly appreciate all the support that
I've been getting lately I think we've
gained I think 200 subscribers in the
past few weeks which is incredible so I
really thank you guys a lot for your
support as always if you guys have
Discord I do have a Discord server
that's currently growing currently under
construction feel free to hop in there
and drop me a note leave me a message
we're trying to build a little community
in there of people that are actively
looking to develop on Cell kit so
that'll about do it as always I hope you
guys have a great day and I will see you
in the next video
[Music]
thank you